# ยง 18. Continuous Functions

!!! definition "Definition 18.1 : Continuous Function"
    Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces.
    A function $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is said to be **continuous** if for each open subset $V$ of $Y$, the set $f^{-1}(V)$ is an open subset of $X$.

    Continuity of a function depends not only upon the function $f$ itself, but also on the topologies specified for its domain and range.
    If we wish to emphasize this fact, we can say that "$f$ is **continuous** relative to specific topologies on $X$ and $Y$".

!!! theorem "Theorem 18.0"
    If the topology of the range space $Y$ is given by a basis $\mathcal{B}$, then to prove continuity of $f$ it suffices to show that the inverse image of every basis element is open.

    If the topology on $Y$ is given by a subbasis $\mathcal{S}$, to prove continuity of $f$ it will even suffice to show that the inverse image of each subbasis element is open.

    !!! proof
        If the topology of the range space $Y$ is given by a basis $\mathcal{B}$, the arbitrary open set $V$ of $Y$ can be written as a union of basis elements

        $$
        V=\bigcup_{\alpha \in J} B_{\alpha}
        $$

        Then

        $$
        f^{-1}(V)=\bigcup_{\alpha \in J} f^{-1}\left(B_{\alpha}\right)
        $$

        so that $f^{-1}(V)$ is open if each set $f^{-1}\left(B_{\alpha}\right)$ is open.

        ---

        If the topology on $Y$ is given by a subbasis $\mathcal{S}$, the arbitrary basis element $B$ for $Y$ can be written as a finite intersection $S_{1} \cap \cdots \cap S_{n}$ of subbasis elements; it follows from the equation

        $$
        f^{-1}(B)=f^{-1}\left(S_{1}\right) \cap \cdots \cap f^{-1}\left(S_{n}\right)
        $$

        that the inverse image of every basis element is open.

!!! example
    Let us consider a function like those studied in analysis, a "real-valued function of a real variable",

    $$
    f: \mathbb{R} \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}
    $$

    In analysis, one defines continuity of $f$ via the " $\epsilon-\delta$ definition".
    As one would expect, the $\epsilon-\delta$ definition and ours are equivalent.
    To prove that our definition implies the $\epsilon-\delta$ definition, for instance, we proceed as follows:

    Given $x_{0}$ in $\mathbb{R}$, and given $\epsilon>0$, the interval $V=\left(f\left(x_{0}\right)-\epsilon, f\left(x_{0}\right)+\epsilon\right)$ is an open set of the range space $\mathbb{R}$.
    Therefore, $f^{-1}(V)$ is an open set in the domain space $\mathbb{R}$.
    Because $f^{-1}(V)$ contains the point $x_{0}$, it contains some basis element $(a, b)$ about $x_{0}$.
    We choose $\delta$ to be the smaller of the two numbers $x_{0}-a$ and $b-x_{0}$.
    Then if $\left|x-x_{0}\right|<\delta$, the point $x$ must be in $(a, b)$, so that $f(x) \in V$, and $\left|f(x)-f\left(x_{0}\right)\right|<\epsilon$, as desired.

    Proving that the $\epsilon-\delta$ definition implies our definition is similar.

!!! theorem "Theorem 18.1"
    Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces; let $f: X \rightarrow Y$.
    Then the following are equivalent:

    1. $f$ is continuous.

    2. For every subset $A$ of $X$, one has $f(\bar{A}) \subset \overline{f(A)}$.

    3. For every closed set $B$ of $Y$, the set $f^{-1}(B)$ is closed in $X$.

    4. For each $x \in X$ and each neighborhood $V$ of $f(x)$, there is a neighborhood $U$ of $x$ such that $f(U) \subset V$.

    If the condition in (4) holds for the point $x$ of $X$, we say that $f$ is **continuous at the point** $x$.

    !!! proof
        We show that $(1) \Rightarrow(2) \Rightarrow(3) \Rightarrow (1)$ and that $(1) \Rightarrow(4) \Rightarrow (1)$.

        $(1) \Rightarrow(2)$.  
        Assume that $f$ is continuous.
        Let $A$ be a subset of $X$.
        We show that if $x \in \bar{A}$, then $f(x) \in \overline{f(A)}$. Let $V$ be a neighborhood of $f(x)$.
        Then $f^{-1}(V)$ is an open set of $X$ containing $x$; it must intersect $A$ in some point $y$.
        Then $V$ intersects $f(A)$ in the point $f(y)$, so that $f(x) \in \overline{f(A)}$, as desired.

        $(2) \Rightarrow (3)$.  
        Let $B$ be closed in $Y$ and let $A=f^{-1}(B)$.
        We wish to prove that $A$ is closed in $X$; we show that $\bar{A}=A$.
        By elementary set theory, we have $f(A)=$ $f\left(f^{-1}(B)\right) \subset B$.
        Therefore, if $x \in \bar{A}$,

        $$
        f(x) \in f(\bar{A}) \subset \overline{f(A)} \subset \bar{B}=B,
        $$

        so that $x \in f^{-1}(B)=A$.
        Thus $\bar{A} \subset A$, so that $\bar{A}=A$, as desired.

        $(3) \Rightarrow (1)$.  
        Let $V$ be an open set of $Y$.
        Set $B=Y-V$.
        Then

        $$
        f^{-1}(B)=f^{-1}(Y)-f^{-1}(V)=X-f^{-1}(V) .
        $$

        Now $B$ is a closed set of $Y$.
        Then $f^{-1}(B)$ is closed in $X$ by hypothesis, so that $f^{-1}(V)$ is open in $X$, as desired.

        $(1) \Rightarrow (4)$.  
        Let $x \in X$ and let $V$ be a neighborhood of $f(x)$.
        Then the set $U=f^{-1}(V)$ is a neighborhood of $x$ such that $f(U) \subset V$.

        $(4) \Rightarrow (1)$.  
        Let $V$ be an open set of $Y$; let $x$ be a point of $f^{-1}(V)$.
        Then $f(x) \in V$, so that by hypothesis there is a neighborhood $U_{x}$ of $x$ such that $f\left(U_{x}\right) \subset V$.
        Then $U_{x} \subset f^{-1}(V)$.
        It follows that $f^{-1}(V)$ can be written as the union of the open sets $U_{x}$, so that it is open.

!!! definition "Definition 18.2 : Homeomorphism / Topological Property"
    Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces; let $f: X \rightarrow Y$ be a bijection. If both the function $f$ and the inverse function

    $$
    f^{-1}: Y \rightarrow X
    $$

    are continuous, then $f$ is called a **homeomorphism**.

    ---

    Another way to define a homeomorphism is to say that it is a bijective correspondence $f: X \rightarrow Y$ such that $f(U)$ is open if and only if $U$ is open.

    This remark shows that a homeomorphism $f: X \rightarrow Y$ gives us a bijective correspondence not only between $X$ and $Y$ but between the collections of open sets of $X$ and of $Y$.
    As a result, any property of $X$ that is entirely expressed in terms of the topology of $X$ (that is, in terms of the open sets of $X$ ) yields, via the correspondence $f$, the corresponding property for the space $Y$.
    Such a property of $X$ is called a **topological property** of $X$.

    Homeomorphism is a bijective correspondence that preserves the topological structure involved.

!!! definition "Topological Imbedding"
    Suppose that $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is an injective continuous map, where $X$ and $Y$ are topological spaces.
    Let $Z$ be the image set $f(X)$, considered as a subspace of $Y$; then the function $f^{\prime}: X \rightarrow Z$ obtained by restricting the range of $f$ is bijective.
    If $f^{\prime}$ happens to be a homeomorphism of $X$ with $Z$, we say that the map $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is a **topological imbedding**, or simply an **imbedding**, of $X$ in $Y$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 18.2 : Rules for Constructing Continuous Functions"
    Let $X, Y$, and $Z$ be topological spaces.

    1. **(Constant function)** If $f: X \rightarrow Y$ maps all of $X$ into the single point $y_{0}$ of $Y$, then $f$ is continuous.

    2. **(Inclusion)** If $A$ is a subspace of $X$, the inclusion function $j: A \rightarrow X$ is continuous.

    3. **(Composites)** If $f: X \rightarrow Y$ and $g: Y \rightarrow Z$ are continuous, then the map $g \circ f: X \rightarrow Z$ is continuous.

    4. **(Restricting the domain)** If $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is continuous, and if $A$ is a subspace of $X$, then the restricted function $f \mid A: A \rightarrow Y$ is continuous.
    
    5. **(Restricting or expanding the range)** Let $f: X \rightarrow Y$ be continuous. If $Z$ is a subspace of $Y$ containing the image set $f(X)$, then the function $g: X \rightarrow Z$ obtained by restricting the range of $f$ is continuous. If $Z$ is a space having $Y$ as a subspace, then the function $h: X \rightarrow Z$ obtained by expanding the range of $f$ is continuous.
    
    6. **(Local formulation of continuity)** The map $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is continuous if $X$ can be written as the union of open sets $U_{\alpha}$ such that $f \mid U_{\alpha}$ is continuous for each $\alpha$.
    
    !!! proof
        1. Let $f(x)=y_{0}$ for every $x$ in $X$.
            Let $V$ be open in $Y$.
            The set $f^{-1}(V)$ equals $X$ or $\varnothing$, depending on whether $V$ contains $y_{0}$ or not.
            In either case, it is open.

        2. If $U$ is open in $X$, then $j^{-1}(U)=U \cap A$, which is open in $A$ by definition of the subspace topology.

        3. If $U$ is open in $Z$, then $g^{-1}(U)$ is open in $Y$ and $f^{-1}\left(g^{-1}(U)\right)$ is open in $X$.
            But

            $$
            f^{-1}\left(g^{-1}(U)\right)=(g \circ f)^{-1}(U),
            $$

            by elementary set theory.

        4. The function $f \mid A$ equals the composite of the inclusion map $j: A \rightarrow X$ and the map $f: X \rightarrow Y$, both of which are continuous.

        5. Let $f: X \rightarrow Y$ be continuous.
            If $f(X) \subset Z \subset Y$, we show that the function $g: X \rightarrow Z$ obtained from $f$ is continuous.
            Let $B$ be open in $Z$.
            Then $B=Z \cap U$ for some open set $U$ of $Y$.
            Because $Z$ contains the entire image set $f(X)$,

            $$
            f^{-1}(U)=g^{-1}(B)
            $$

            by elementary set theory.
            Since $f^{-1}(U)$ is open, so is $g^{-1}(B)$.

            To show $h: X \rightarrow Z$ is continuous if $Z$ has $Y$ as a subspace, note that $h$ is the composite of the map $f: X \rightarrow Y$ and the inclusion map $j: Y \rightarrow Z$.

        6. By hypothesis, we can write $X$ as a union of open sets $U_{\alpha}$, such that $f \mid U_{\alpha}$, is continuous for each $\alpha$.
            Let $V$ be an open set in $Y$.
            Then

            $$
            f^{-1}(V) \cap U_{\alpha}=\left(f \mid U_{\alpha}\right)^{-1}(V),
            $$

            because both expressions represent the set of those points $x$ lying in $U_{\alpha}$ for which $f(x) \in V$.
            Since $f \mid U$ is continuous, this set is open in $U_{\alpha}$, and hence open in $X$.
            But

            $$
            f^{-1}(V)=\bigcup_{\alpha}\left(f^{-1}(V) \cap U_{\alpha}\right),
            $$

            so that $f^{-1}(V)$ is also open in $X$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 18.3 : The Pasting Lemma"
    Let $X=A \cup B$, where $A$ and $B$ are closed in $X$.
    Let $f: A \rightarrow Y$ and $g: B \rightarrow Y$ be continuous.
    If $f(x)=g(x)$ for every $x \in A \cap B$, then $f$ and $g$ combine to give a continuous function $h: X \rightarrow Y$, defined by setting $h(x)=f(x)$ if $x \in A$, and $h(x)=g(x)$ if $x \in B$.

    This theorem also holds if $A$ and $B$ are open sets in $X$; this is just a special case of the "local formulation of continuity" rule given in **Theorem 18.2**.

    !!! proof
        Let $C$ be a closed subset of $Y$.
        Now

        $$
        h^{-1}(C)=f^{-1}(C) \cup g^{-1}(C)
        $$

        by elementary set theory.
        Since $f$ is continuous, $f^{-1}(C)$ is closed in $A$ and, therefore, closed in $X$.
        Similarly, $g^{-1}(C)$ is closed in $B$ and therefore closed in $X$.
        Their union $h^{-1}(C)$ is thus closed in $X$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 18.4 : Maps into Products"
    Let $f: A \rightarrow X \times Y$ be given by the equation

    $$
    f(a)=\left(f_{1}(a), f_{2}(a)\right) .
    $$

    Then $f$ is continuous if and only if the functions

    $$
    f_{1}: A \longrightarrow X \quad \text { and } \quad f_{2}: A \longrightarrow Y
    $$

    are continuous.

    The maps $f_{1}$ and $f_{2}$ are called the **coordinate functions** of $f$.

    !!! proof
        Let $\pi_{1}: X \times Y \rightarrow X$ and $\pi_{2}: X \times Y \rightarrow Y$ be projections onto the first and second factors, respectively.
        These maps are continuous.
        For $\pi_{1}^{-1}(U)=U \times Y$ and $\pi_{2}^{-1}(V)=X \times V$, and these sets are open if $U$ and $V$ are open.
        Note that for each $a \in A$,

        $$
        f_{1}(a)=\pi_{1}(f(a)) \quad \text { and } \quad f_{2}(a)=\pi_{2}(f(a)).
        $$

        If the function $f$ is continuous, then $f_{1}$ and $f_{2}$ are composites of continuous functions and therefore continuous.
        
        Conversely, suppose that $f_{1}$ and $f_{2}$ are continuous.
        We show that for each basis element $U \times V$ for the topology of $X \times Y$, its inverse image $f^{-1}(U \times V)$ is open.
        A point $a$ is in $f^{-1}(U \times V)$ if and only if $f(a) \in U \times V$, that is, if and only if $f_{1}(a) \in U$ and $f_{2}(a) \in V$.
        Therefore,

        $$
        f^{-1}(U \times V)=f_{1}^{-1}(U) \cap f_{2}^{-1}(V)
        $$

        Since both of the sets $f_{1}^{-1}(U)$ and $f_{2}^{-1}(V)$ are open, so is their intersection.