# ยง 25. Components and Local Connectedness

!!! definition "Definition 25.1 : Components"
    Given $X$, define an equivalence relation on $X$ by setting $x \sim y$ if there is a connected subspace of $X$ containing both $x$ and $y$.
    The equivalence classes are called the **components** (or the "**connected components**") of $X$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.0"
    Given $X$, define a relation on $X$ by setting $x \sim y$ if there is a connected subspace of $X$ containing both $x$ and $y$.
    The defined relation is indeed, an equivalence relation.

    !!! proof
        Symmetry and reflexivity of the relation are obvious.
        Transitivity follows by noting that if $A$ is a connected subspace containing $x$ and $y$, and if $B$ is a connected subspace containing $y$ and $z$, then $A \cup B$ is a subspace containing $x$ and $z$ that is connected because $A$ and $B$ have the point $y$ in common.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.1"
    The components of $X$ are connected disjoint subspaces of $X$ whose union is $X$, such that each nonempty connected subspace of $X$ intersects only one of them.

    !!! proof
        Being equivalence classes, the components of $X$ are disjoint and their union is $X$.
        Each connected subspace $A$ of $X$ intersects only one of them.
        For if $A$ intersects the components $C_{1}$ and $C_{2}$ of $X$, say in points $x_{1}$ and $x_{2}$, respectively, then $x_{1} \sim x_{2}$ by definition; this cannot happen unless $C_{1}=C_{2}$.

        To show the component $C$ is connected, choose a point $x_{0}$ of $C$.
        For each point $x$ of $C$, we know that $x_{0} \sim x$, so there is a connected subspace $A_{x}$ containing $x_{0}$ and $x$.
        By the result just proved, $A_{x} \subset C$.
        Therefore,

        $$
        C=\bigcup_{x \in C} A_{x}
        $$

        Since the subspaces $A_{x}$ are connected and have the point $x_{0}$ in common, their union is connected.

!!! definition "Definition 25.2 : Path Components"
    We define another equivalence relation on the space $X$ by defining $x \sim y$ if there is a path in $X$ from $x$ to $y$.
    The equivalence classes are called the **path components** of $X$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.1.1"
    Let's define a relation on the space $X$ by defining $x \sim y$ if there is a path in $X$ from $x$ to $y$.
    The defined relation is indeed, an equivalence relation.

    !!! proof
        Let us show this is an equivalence relation.
        First we note that if there exists a path $f:[a, b] \rightarrow X$ from $x$ to $y$ whose domain is the interval $[a, b]$, then there is also a path $g$ from $x$ to $y$ having the closed interval $[c, d]$ as its domain.
        (This follows from the fact that any two closed intervals in $\mathbb{R}$ are homeomorphic.)

        Now the fact that $x \sim x$ for each $x$ in $X$ follows from the existence of the constant path $f:[a, b] \rightarrow X$ defined by the equation $f(t)=x$ for all $t$.  
        Symmetry follows from the fact that if $f:[0,1] \rightarrow X$ is a path from $x$ to $y$, then the "reverse path" $g:[0,1] \rightarrow X$ defined by $g(t)=f(1-t)$ is a path from $y$ to $x$.  
        Finally, transitivity is proved as follows: Let $f:[0,1] \rightarrow X$ be a path from $x$ to $y$, and let $g:[1,2] \rightarrow X$ be a path from $y$ to $z$.
        We can "paste $f$ and $g$ together" to get a path $h:[0,2] \rightarrow X$ from $x$ to $z$; the path $h$ will be continuous by the "**pasting lemma**," **Theorem 18.3**.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.2"
    The path components of $X$ are path-connected disjoint subspaces of $X$ whose union is $X$, such that each nonempty path-connected subspace of $X$ intersects only one of them.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.2.1"
    Each component of a space $X$ is closed in $X$, since the closure of a connected subspace of $X$ is connected.
    
    If $X$ has only finitely many components, then each component is also open in $X$, since its complement is a finite union of closed sets.
    But in general the components of $X$ need not be open in $X$.

    One can say even less about the path components of $X$, for they need be neither open nor closed in $X$.

!!! example
    The "topologist's sine curve" $\bar{S}$ of the preceding section is a space that has a single component (since it is connected) and two path components.
    One path component is the curve $S$ and the other is the vertical interval $V=0 \times[-1,1]$.
    Note that $S$ is open in $\bar{S}$ but not closed, while $V$ is closed but not open.

    If one forms a space from $\bar{S}$ by deleting all points of $V$ having rational second coordinate, one obtains a space that has only one component but uncountably many path components.

!!! definition "Definition 25.3 : Locally Connected / Locally Path Connected"
    A space $X$ is said to be **locally connected at** $x$ if for every neighborhood $U$ of $x$, there is a connected neighborhood $V$ of $x$ contained in $U$.
    If $X$ is locally connected at each of its points, it is said simply to be **locally connected**.

    Similarly, a space $X$ is said to be **locally path connected at** $x$ if for every neighborhood $U$ of $x$, there is a path-connected neighborhood $V$ of $x$ contained in $U$.
    If $X$ is locally path connected at each of its points, then it is said to be **locally path connected**.

!!! example
    Each interval and each ray in the real line is both connected and locally connected.
    The subspace $[-1,0) \cup(0,1]$ of $\mathbb{R}$ is not connected, but it is locally connected.
    The topologist's sine curve is connected but not locally connected.
    The rationals $\mathbb{Q}$ are neither connected nor locally connected.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.3"
    A space $X$ is locally connected if and only if for every open set $U$ of $X$, each component of $U$ is open in $X$.

!!! proof
    Suppose that $X$ is locally connected; let $U$ be an open set in $X$;
    let $C$ be a component of $U$.
    If $x$ is a point of $C$, we can choose a connected neighborhood $V$ of $x$ such that $V \subset U$.
    Since $V$ is connected, it must lie entirely in the component $C$ of $U$.
    Therefore, $C$ is open in $X$.

    Conversely, suppose that components of open sets in $X$ are open.
    Given a point $x$ of $X$ and a neighborhood $U$ of $x$, let $C$ be the component of $U$ containing $x$.
    Now $C$ is connected; since it is open in $X$ by hypothesis, $X$ is locally connected at $x$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.4"
    A space $X$ is locally path connected if and only if for every open set $U$ of $X$, each path component of $U$ is open in $X$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 25.5"
    If $X$ is a topological space, each path component of $X$ lies in a component of $X$.
    
    If $X$ is locally path connected, then the components and the path components of $X$ are the same.

    !!! proof
        Let $C$ be a component of $X$; let $x$ be a point of $C$; let $P$ be the path component of $X$ containing $x$.
        Since $P$ is connected, $P \subset C$. We wish to show that if $X$ is locally path connected, $P=C$.
        Suppose that $P \subsetneq C$.
        Let $Q$ denote the union of all the path components of $X$ that are different from $P$ and intersect $C$; each of them necessarily lies in $C$, so that

        $$
        C=P \cup Q
        $$

        Because $X$ is locally path connected, each path component of $X$ is open in $X$.
        Therefore, $P$ (which is a path component) and $Q$ (which is a union of path components) are open in $X$, so they constitute a separation of $C$.
        This contradicts the fact that $C$ is connected.