# ยง 28. Limit Point Compactness

!!! definition "Definition 28.1 : Limit Point Compact"
    A space $X$ is said to be **limit point compact** if every infinite subset of $X$ has a limit point.

!!! theorem "Theorem 28.1"
    Compactness implies limit point compactness, but not conversely.

    !!! proof
        Let $X$ be a compact space.
        Given a subset $A$ of $X$, we wish to prove that if $A$ is infinite, then $A$ has a limit point.
        We prove the contrapositive-if $A$ has no limit point, then $A$ must be finite.

        So suppose $A$ has no limit point.
        Then $A$ contains all its limit points, so that $A$ is closed.
        Furthermore, for each $a \in A$ we can choose a neighborhood $U_{a}$ of $a$ such that $U_{a}$ intersects $A$ in the point $a$ alone.
        The space $X$ is covered by the open set $X-A$ and the open sets $U_{a}$; being compact, it can be covered by finitely many of these sets.
        Since $X-A$ does not intersect $A$, and each set $U_{a}$ contains only one point of $A$, the set $A$ must be finite.

!!! definition "Definition 28.2 : Subsequence / Sequentially Compact"
    Let $X$ be a topological space. If $\left(x_{n}\right)$ is a sequence of points of $X$, and if

    $$
    n_{1}<n_{2}<\cdots<n_{i}<\cdots
    $$

    is an increasing sequence of positive integers, then the sequence $\left(y_{i}\right)$ defined by setting $y_{i}=x_{n_{i}}$ is called a subsequence of the sequence $\left(x_{n}\right)$.
    The space $X$ is said to be sequentially compact if every sequence of points of $X$ has a convergent subsequence.

!!! theorem "Theorem 28.2"
    Let $X$ be a metrizable space. Then the following are equivalent:
        
    1. $X$ is compact.
    2. $X$ is limit point compact.
    3. $X$ is sequentially compact.

    !!! proof
        We have already proved that (1) $\Rightarrow$ (2).
        To show that (2) $\Rightarrow$ (3), assume that $X$ is limit point compact.
        Given a sequence $\left(x_{n}\right)$ of points of $X$, consider the set $A=\left\{x_{n} \mid n \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}\right\}$.
        If the set $A$ is finite, then there is a point $x$ such that $x=x_{n}$ for infinitely many values of $n$.
        In this case, the sequence $\left(x_{n}\right)$ has a subsequence that is constant, and therefore converges trivially.
        On the other hand, if $A$ is infinite, then $A$ has a limit point $x$.
        We define a subsequence of $\left(x_{n}\right)$ converging to $x$ as follows: First choose $n_{1}$ so that

        $$
        x_{n_{1}} \in B(x, 1) \text {. }
        $$

        Then suppose that the positive integer $n_{i-1}$ is given.
        Because the ball $B(x, 1 / i)$ intersects $A$ in infinitely many points, we can choose an index $n_{i}>n_{i-1}$ such that

        $$
        x_{n_{i}} \in B(x, 1 / i) .
        $$

        Then the subsequence $x_{n_{1}}, x_{n_{2}}, \ldots$ converges to $x$.

        Finally, we show that $(3) \Rightarrow$ (1).
        This is the hardest part of the proof.

        First, we show that if $X$ is sequentially compact, then the Lebesgue number lemma holds for $X$.
        (This would follow from compactness, but compactness is what we are trying to prove!)
        Let $\mathcal{A}$ be an open covering of $X$.
        We assume that there is no $\delta>0$ such that each set of diameter less than $\delta$ has an element of $\mathcal{A}$ containing it, and derive a contradiction.

        Our assumption implies in particular that for each positive integer $n$, there exists a set of diameter less than $1 / n$ that is not contained in any element of $\mathcal{A}$; let $C_{n}$ be such a set.
        Choose a point $x_{n} \in C_{n}$, for each $n$.
        By hypothesis, some subsequence $\left(x_{n_{i}}\right)$ of the sequence $\left(x_{n}\right)$ converges, say to the point $a$.
        Now $a$ belongs to some element $A$ of the collection $\mathcal{A}$; because $A$ is open, we may choose an $\epsilon>0$ such that $B(a, \epsilon) \subset A$.
        If $i$ is large enough that $1 / n_{i}<\epsilon / 2$, then the set $C_{n_{i}}$ lies in the $\epsilon / 2$-neighborhood of $x_{n_{i}}$; if $i$ is also chosen large enough that $d\left(x_{n_{i}}, a\right)<\epsilon / 2$, then $C_{n_{i}}$ lies in the $\epsilon$-neighborhood of $a$.
        But this means that $C_{n_{i}} \subset A$, contrary to hypothesis.

        Second, we show that if $X$ is sequentially compact, then given $\epsilon>0$, there exists a finite covering of $X$ by open $\epsilon$-balls.
        Once again, we proceed by contradiction.
        Assume that there exists an $\epsilon>0$ such that $X$ cannot be covered by finitely many $\epsilon$-balls.
        Construct a sequence of points $x_{n}$ of $X$ as follows: First, choose $x_{1}$ to be any point of $X$.
        Noting that the ball $B\left(x_{1}, \epsilon\right)$ is not all of $X$ (otherwise $X$ could be covered by a single $\epsilon$-ball), choose $x_{2}$ to be a point of $X$ not in $B\left(x_{1}, \epsilon\right)$.
        In general, given $x_{1}, \ldots, x_{n}$, choose $x_{n+1}$ to be a point not in the union

        $$
        B\left(x_{1}, \epsilon\right) \cup \cdots \cup B\left(x_{n}, \epsilon\right)
        $$

        using the fact that these balls do not cover $X$.
        Note that by construction $d\left(x_{n+1}, x_{i}\right) \geq$ $\epsilon$ for $i=1, \ldots, n$.
        Therefore, the sequence $\left(x_{n}\right)$ can have no convergent subsequence; in fact, any ball of radius $\epsilon / 2$ can contain $x_{n}$ for at most one value of $n$.

        Finally, we show that if $X$ is sequentially compact, then $X$ is compact. Let $\mathcal{A}$ be an open covering of $X$.
        Because $X$ is sequentially compact, the open covering $\mathcal{A}$ has a Lebesgue number $\delta$.
        Let $\epsilon=\delta / 3$; use sequential compactness of $X$ to find a finite covering of $X$ by open $\epsilon$-balls. Each of these balls has diameter at most $2 \delta / 3$, so it lies in an element of $\mathcal{A}$.
        Choosing one such element of $\mathcal{A}$ for each of these $\epsilon$-balls, we obtain a finite subcollection of $\mathcal{A}$ that covers $X$.