# ยง 29. Local Compactness

!!! definition "Definition 29.1 : Locally Compact"
    A space $X$ is said to be **locally compact at** $x$ if there is some compact subspace $C$ of $X$ that contains a neighborhood of $x$.
    If $X$ is locally compact at each of its points, $X$ is said simply to be **locally compact**.

    Note that a compact space is automatically locally compact.

!!! example
    The real line $\mathbb{R}$ is locally compact.
    The point $x$ lies in some interval $(a, b)$, which in turn is contained in the compact subspace $[a, b]$.

!!! example
    The space $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ is locally compact; the point $x$ lies in some basis element $\left(a_{1}, b_{1}\right) \times \cdots \times\left(a_{n}, b_{n}\right)$, which in turn lies in the compact subspace $\left[a_{1}, b_{1}\right] \times \cdots \times\left[a_{n}, b_{n}\right]$.
    The space $\mathbb{R}^{\omega}$ is not locally compact; none of its basis elements are contained in compact subspaces. For if

    $$
    B=\left(a_{1}, b_{1}\right) \times \cdots \times\left(a_{n}, b_{n}\right) \times \mathbb{R} \times \cdots \times \mathbb{R} \times \cdots
    $$
    
    were contained in a compact subspace, then its closure

    $$
    \bar{B}=\left[a_{1}, b_{1}\right] \times \cdots \times\left[a_{n}, b_{n}\right] \times \mathbb{R} \times \cdots
    $$

    would be compact, which it is not.

!!! example
    Every simply ordered set $X$ having the least upper bound property is locally compact: Given a basis element for $X$, it is contained in a closed interval in $X$, which is compact.

!!! theorem "Theorem 29.1"
    Let $X$ be a space.
    Then $X$ is locally compact Hausdorff if and only if there exists a space $Y$ satisfying the following conditions:

    1. $X$ is a subspace of $Y$.
    2. The set $Y-X$ consists of a single point.
    3. $Y$ is a compact Hausdorff space.

    If $Y$ and $Y^{\prime}$ are two spaces satisfying these conditions, then there is a homeomorphism of $Y$ with $Y^{\prime}$ that equals the identity map on $X$.

    !!! proof
        Step 1.  
        We first verify uniqueness.
        Let $Y$ and $Y^{\prime}$ be two spaces satisfying these conditions.
        Define $h: Y \rightarrow Y^{\prime}$ by letting $h$ map the single point $p$ of $Y-X$ to the point $q$ of $Y^{\prime}-X$, and letting $h$ equal the identity on $X$.
        We show that if $U$ is open in $Y$, then $h(U)$ is open in $Y^{\prime}$.
        Symmetry then implies that $h$ is a homeomorphism.

        First, consider the case where $U$ does not contain $p$.
        Then $h(U)=U$.
        Since $U$ is open in $Y$ and is contained in $X$, it is open in $X$.
        Because $X$ is open in $Y^{\prime}$, the set $U$ is also open in $Y^{\prime}$, as desired.

        Second, suppose that $U$ contains $p$.
        Since $C=Y-U$ is closed in $Y$, it is compact as a subspace of $Y$.
        Because $C$ is contained in $X$, it is a compact subspace of $X$.
        Then because $X$ is a subspace of $Y^{\prime}$, the space $C$ is also a compact subspace of $Y^{\prime}$.
        Because $Y^{\prime}$ is Hausdorff, $C$ is closed in $Y^{\prime}$, so that $h(U)=Y^{\prime}-C$ is open in $Y^{\prime}$, as desired.

        Step 2.  
        Now we suppose $X$ is locally compact Hausdorff and construct the space $Y$.
        Step 1 gives us an idea how to proceed.
        Let us take some object that is not a point of $X$, denote it by the symbol $\infty$ for convenience, and adjoin it to $X$, forming the set $Y=X \cup\{\infty\}$.
        Topologize $Y$ by defining the collection of open sets of $Y$ to consist of (1) all sets $U$ that are open in $X$, and (2) all sets of the form $Y-C$, where $C$ is a compact subspace of $X$.

        We need to check that this collection is, in fact, a topology on $Y$.
        The empty set is a set of type (1), and the space $Y$ is a set of type (2). Checking that the intersection of two open sets is open involves three cases:

        $$
        \begin{array}{rlrl}
        U_{1} \cap U_{2} & & \text { is of type (1). } \\
        \left(Y-C_{1}\right) \cap\left(Y-C_{2}\right) & =Y-\left(C_{1} \cup C_{2}\right) & & \text { is of type (2). } \\
        U_{1} \cap\left(Y-C_{1}\right) & =U_{1} \cap\left(X-C_{1}\right) & & \text { is of type (1), }
        \end{array}
        $$

        because $C_{1}$ is closed in $X$.
        Similarly, one checks that the union of any collection of open sets is open:

        $$
        \begin{aligned}
        & \bigcup U_{\alpha}=U \quad \text { is of type (1). } \\
        & \bigcup\left(Y-C_{\beta}\right)=Y-\left(\bigcap C_{\beta}\right)=Y-C \quad \text { is of type (2). } \\
        & \left(\bigcup U_{\alpha}\right) \cup\left(\bigcup\left(Y-C_{\beta}\right)\right)=U \cup(Y-C)=Y-(C-U) \text {, }
        \end{aligned}
        $$

        which is of type (2) because $C-U$ is a closed subspace of $C$ and therefore compact.

        Now we show that $X$ is a subspace of $Y$.
        Given any open set of $Y$, we show its intersection with $X$ is open in $X$.
        If $U$ is of type (1), then $U \cap X=U$; if $Y-C$ is of type (2), then $(Y-C) \cap X=X-C$; both of these sets are open in $X$.
        Conversely, any set open in $X$ is a set of type (1) and therefore open in $Y$ by definition.

        To show that $Y$ is compact, let $\mathcal{A}$ be an open covering of $Y$.
        The collection $\mathcal{A}$ must contain an open set of type (2), say $Y-C$, since none of the open sets of type (1) contain the point $\infty$.
        Take all the members of $\mathcal{A}$ different from $Y-C$ and intersect them with $X$; they form a collection of open sets of $X$ covering $C$.
        Because $C$ is compact, finitely many of them cover $C$; the corresponding finite collection of elements of $\mathcal{A}$ will, along with the element $Y-C$, cover all of $Y$.

        To show that $Y$ is Hausdorff, let $x$ and $y$ be two points of $Y$.
        If both of them lie in $X$, there are disjoint sets $U$ and $V$ open in $X$ containing them, respectively.
        On the other hand, if $x \in X$ and $y=\infty$, we can choose a compact set $C$ in $X$ containing a neighborhood $U$ of $x$.
        Then $U$ and $Y-C$ are disjoint neighborhoods of $x$ and $\infty$, respectively, in $Y$.

        Step 3.  
        Finally, we prove the converse.
        Suppose a space $Y$ satisfying conditions (1)-(3) exists.
        Then $X$ is Hausdorff because it is a subspace of the Hausdorff space $Y$.
        Given $x \in X$, we show $X$ is locally compact at $x$.
        Choose disjoint open sets $U$ and $V$ of $Y$ containing $x$ and the single point of $Y-X$, respectively.
        Then the set $C=Y-V$ is closed in $Y$, so it is a compact subspace of $Y$.
        Since $C$ lies in $X$, it is also compact as a subspace of $X$; it contains the neighborhood $U$ of $x$.
    
    If $X$ itself should happen to be compact, then the space $Y$ is not very interesting, for it is obtained from $X$ by adjoining a single isolated point.
    However, if $X$ is not compact, then the point of $Y-X$ is a limit point of $X$, so that $\bar{X}=Y$.

!!! definition "Definition 29.2 : Compactification / One-Point Compactification"
    If $Y$ is a compact Hausdorff space and $X$ is a proper subspace of $Y$ whose closure equals $Y$, then $Y$ is said to be a **compactification** of $X$. If $Y-X$ equals a single point, then $Y$ is called the **one-point compactification** of $X$.

    By **Theorem 29.1**, we have shown that $X$ has a one-point compactification $Y$ if and only if $X$ is a locally compact Hausdorff space that is not itself compact.
    We speak of $Y$ as "the" one-point compactification because $Y$ is uniquely determined up to a homeomorphism.

!!! theorem "Theorem 29.2"
    Let $X$ be a Hausdorff space.
    Then $X$ is locally compact if and only if given $x$ in $X$, and given a neighborhood $U$ of $x$, there is a neighborhood $V$ of $x$ such that $\bar{V}$ is compact and $\bar{V} \subset U$.

    !!! proof
        Clearly this new formulation implies local compactness; the set $C=\bar{V}$ is the desired compact set containing a neighborhood of $x$.
        
        To prove the converse, suppose $X$ is locally compact; let $x$ be a point of $X$ and let $U$ be a neighborhood of $x$.
        Take the one-point compactification $Y$ of $X$, and let $C$ be the set $Y-U$.
        Then $C$ is closed in $Y$, so that $C$ is a compact subspace of $Y$.
        Apply **Lemma 26.4** to choose disjoint open sets $V$ and $W$ containing $x$ and $C$, respectively.
        Then the closure $\bar{V}$ of $V$ in $Y$ is compact; furthermore, $\bar{V}$ is disjoint from $C$, so that $\bar{V} \subset U$, as desired.

!!! theorem "Corollary 29.3"
    Let $X$ be locally compact Hausdorff; let $A$ be a subspace of $X$.
    If $A$ is closed in $X$ or open in $X$, then $A$ is locally compact.

    !!! proof
        Suppose that $A$ is closed in $X$.
        Given $x \in A$, let $C$ be a compact subspace of $X$ containing the neighborhood $U$ of $x$ in $X$.
        Then $C \cap A$ is closed in $C$ and thus compact, and it contains the neighborhood $U \cap A$ of $x$ in $A$.
        (We have not used the Hausdorff condition here.)

        Suppose now that $A$ is open in $X$.
        Given $x \in A$, we apply the **Theorem 29.2** to choose a neighborhood $V$ of $x$ in $X$ such that $\bar{V}$ is compact and $\bar{V} \subset A$.
        Then $C=\bar{V}$ is a compact subspace of $A$ containing the neighborhood $V$ of $x$ in $A$.
    
!!! theorem "Corollary 29.4"
    A space $X$ is homeomorphic to an open subspace of a compact Hausdorff space if and only if $X$ is locally compact Hausdorff.

    !!! proof
        This follows from **Theorem 29.1** and **Corollary 29.3**.