# ยง 4. The Integers and the Real Numbers

!!! definition "Definition 4.1 : Binary Operation"
    A binary operation on a set $A$ is a function $f$ mapping $A \times A$ into $A$.

    We usually write the value of the function at $(a, a')$ as $afa'$.

!!! definition "Definition 4.2 : Real Numbers"
    We assume there exists a set $\mathbb{R}$, called the set of **real numbers**, two binary operations $+$ and $\cdot$ on $\mathbb{R}$, called the addition and multiplication operations, respectively, and an order relation $<$ on $\mathbb{R}$, such that the following properties hold:

    1. $(x+y)+z=x+(y+z)$,  
        $(x \cdot y) \cdot z=x \cdot(y \cdot z)$ for all $x, y, z$ in $\mathbb{R}$.

    2. $x+y=y+x$,  
        $x \cdot y=y \cdot x$ for all $x, y$ in $\mathbb{R}$.

    3. There exists a unique element of $\mathbb{R}$ called **zero**, denoted by $0$, such that $x+0=x$ for all $x \in \mathbb{R}$.  
    There exists a unique element of $\mathbb{R}$ called **one**, different from $0$ and denoted by $1$, such that $x \cdot 1=x$ for all $x \in \mathbb{R}$.

    4. For each $x$ in $\mathbb{R}$, there exists a unique $y$ in $\mathbb{R}$ such that $x+y=0$.  
    For each $x$ in $\mathbb{R}$ different from $0$, there exists a unique $y$ in $\mathbb{R}$ such that $x \cdot y=1$.

    5. $x \cdot(y+z)=(x \cdot y)+(x \cdot z)$ for all $x, y, z \in \mathbb{R}$.

    6. If $x>y$, then $x+z>y+z$.  
        If $x>y$ and $z>0$, then $x \cdot z>y \cdot z$.

    7. The order relation $<$ has the least upper bound property.

    8. If $x<y$, there exists an element $z$ such that $x<z$ and $z<y$.

    ---

    From properties (1)-(5) follow the familiar "laws of algebra."  
    Given $x$, one denotes by $-x$ that number $y$ such that $x+y=0$; it is called the **negative** of $x$.
    One defines the **subtraction operation** by the formula $z-x=z+(-x)$.  
    Similarly, given $x \neq 0$, one denotes by $1 / x$ that number $y$ such that $x \cdot y=1$; it is called the **reciprocal** of $x$.
    One defines the **quotient** $z / x$ by the formula $z / x=z \cdot(1 / x)$.  
    The usual laws of signs, and the rules for adding and multiplying fractions, follow as theorems.
    We often denote $x \cdot y$ simply by $x y$.

    When one adjoins property (6) to properties (1)-(5), one can prove the usual "laws of inequalities".      
    We define a number $x$ to be **positive** if $x>0$, and to be **negative** if $x<0$.
    We denote the positive reals by $\mathbb{R}_{+}$and the nonnegative reals by $\overline{\mathbb{R}}_{+}$.  
    Properties (1)-(6) are familiar properties in modern algebra. Any set with two binary operations satisfying (1)-(5) is called by algebraists a **field**; if the field has an order relation satisfying (6), it is called an **ordered field**.

    Properties (7) and (8), on the other hand, are familiar properties in topology.
    They involve only the order relation; any set with an order relation satisfying (7) and (8) is called by topologists a **linear continuum**.

    Property (8) can be proved using properties (1)-(7), so only properties (1)-(7) are axioms.

!!! definition "Definition 4.3 : Inductive Set / Positive Integers"
    A subset $A$ of the real numbers is said to be **inductive** if it contains the number $1$, and if for every $x$ in $A$, the number $x+1$ is also in $A$.
    Let $\mathcal{A}$ be the collection of all inductive subsets of $\mathbb{R}$.
    Then the set $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ of **positive integers** is defined by the equation

    $$
    \mathbb{Z}_{+}=\bigcap_{A \in \mathcal{A}} A.
    $$

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.0 : Property of Positive Integers"
    1. $\mathbb{Z}_{+} \subset \mathbb{R}_{+}$.
    2. $1$ is the smallest element of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$.
    3. $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ is inductive.
    4. (Principle of induction) If $A$ is an inductive set of positive integers, then $A=\mathbb{Z}_{+}$.

!!! definition "Definition 4.4 : Integers / Rational Numbers"
    We define the set $\mathbb{Z}$ of **integers** to be the set consisting of the positive integers $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$, the number $0$, and the negatives of the elements of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$.

    The sum, difference, and product of two integers are integers, but the quotient is not necessarily an integer.
    The set $\mathbb{Q}$ of quotients of integers is called the set of **rational numbers**.

!!! definition "Definition 4.5 : Section of Positive Integers"
    If $n$ is a positive integer, we use the symbol $S_{n}$ to denote the set of all positive integers less than $n$; we call it a **section of the positive integers**.
    The set $S_{1}$ is empty, and $S_{n+1}$ denotes the set of positive integers between 1 and $n$, inclusive.
    We also use the notation

    $$
    \{1, \ldots, n\}=S_{n+1}
    $$

    for the latter set.

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.1 : Well-Ordering Property"
    Every nonempty subset of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$has a smallest element.

    !!! proof
        We first prove that, for each $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}$, the following statement holds: Every nonempty subset of $\{1, \ldots, n\}$ has a smallest element.

        Let $A$ be the set of all positive integers $\mathrm{n}$ for which this statement holds.
        Then $A$ contains $1$, since if $n=1$, the only nonempty subset of $\{1, \ldots, n\}$ is the set $\{1\}$ itself.
        Then, supposing $A$ contains $n$, we show that it contains $n+1$.
        So let $C$ be a nonempty subset of the set $\{1, \ldots, n+1\}$.
        If $C$ consists of the single element $n+1$, then that element is the smallest element of $C$.
        Otherwise, consider the set $C \cap\{1, \ldots, n\}$, which is nonempty.
        Because $n \in A$, this set has a smallest element, which will automatically be the smallest element of $C$ also.
        Thus $A$ is inductive, so we conclude that $A=\mathbb{Z}_{+}$; hence the statement is true for all $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}$.

        Now we prove the theorem.
        Suppose that $D$ is a nonempty subset of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$.
        Choose an element $n$ of $D$.
        Then the set $A=D \cap\{1, \ldots, n\}$ is nonempty, so that $A$ has a smallest element $k$.
        The element $k$ is automatically the smallest element of $D$ as well.

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.2 : Strong Induction Principle"
    Let $A$ be a set of positive integers.
    Suppose that for each positive integer $n$, the statement $S_{n} \subset A$ implies the statement $n \in A$.
    Then $A=\mathbb{Z}_{+}$.

    !!! proof
        If $A$ does not equal all of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$, let $n$ be the smallest positive integer that is not in $A$.
        Then every positive integer less than $n$ is in $A$, so that $S_{n} \subset A$.
        Our hypothesis implies that $n \in A$, contrary to assumption.

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.3 : Archimedean Ordering Property"
    The set $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ of positive integers has no upper bound in $\mathbb{R}$.

    !!! proof
        We assume that $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$has an upper bound and derive a contradiction.
        If $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$has an upper bound, it has a least upper bound $b$.
        There exists $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}$such that $n>b-1$; for otherwise, $b-1$ would be an upper bound for $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ smaller than $b$.
        Then $n+1>b$, contrary to the fact that $b$ is an upper bound for $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$.