# ยง 6. Finite Sets

!!! definition "Definition 6.1 : Finite Set"
    A set is said to be **finite** if there is a bijective correspondence of $A$ with some section of the positive integers.
    That is, $A$ is finite if it is empty or if there is a bijection

    $$
    f: A \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}
    $$

    for some positive integer $n$.
    In the former case, we say that $A$ has **cardinality 0**; in the latter case, we say that $A$ has **cardinality ${n}$**.

!!! theorem "Lemma 6.1"
    Let $n$ be a positive integer.
    Let $A$ be a set; let $a_{0}$ be an element of $A$.  
    Then there exists a bijective correspondence $f$ of the set $A$ with the set $\{1, \ldots, n+1\}$ if and only if there exists a bijective correspondence $g$ of the set $A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$ with the set $\{1, \ldots, n\}$.

    !!! proof
        ($\Rightarrow$)  
        First, let us assume that there is a bijective correspondence

        $$
        g: A-\left\{a_{0}\right\} \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\} .
        $$

        We then define a function $f: A \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, n+1\}$ by setting

        $$
        \begin{aligned}
        f(x) & =g(x) \quad \text { for } x \in A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}, \\
        f\left(a_{0}\right) & =n+1 .
        \end{aligned}
        $$

        One checks at once that $f$ is bijective.

        ($\Leftarrow$)  
        To prove the converse, assume there is a bijective correspondence

        $$
        f: A \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, n+1\}
        $$

        If $f$ maps $a_{0}$ to the number $n+1$, things are especially easy; in that case, the restriction $f \mid A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$ is the desired bijective correspondence of $A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$ with $\{1, \ldots, n\}$. Otherwise, let $f\left(a_{0}\right)=m$, and let $a_{1}$ be the point of $A$ such that $f\left(a_{1}\right)=n+1$. Then $a_{1} \neq a_{0}$. Define a new function

        $$
        h: A \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, n+1\}
        $$

        by setting

        $$
        \begin{aligned}
        h\left(a_{0}\right) & =n+1, \\
        h\left(a_{1}\right) & =m, \\
        h(x) & =f(x) \quad \text { for } x \in A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}-\left\{a_{1}\right\} .
        \end{aligned}
        $$
        
        Now we are back in the easy case; the restriction $h \mid A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$ is the desired bijection of $A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$ with $\{1, \ldots, n\}$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 6.2"
    Let $A$ be a set; suppose that there exists a bijection $f: A \rightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}$.
    Let $B$ be a proper subset of $A$.  
    Then there exists no bijection $g: B \rightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}$;  
    but (provided $B \neq \varnothing$) there does exist a bijection $h: B \rightarrow$ $\{1, \ldots, m\}$ for some $m<n$.

    !!! proof
        The case in which $B=\varnothing$ is trivial, for there cannot exist a bijection of the empty set $B$ with the nonempty set $\{1, \ldots, n\}$.

        We prove the theorem "by induction." Let $C$ be the subset of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$consisting of those integers $n$ for which the theorem holds.
        We shall show that $C$ is inductive.
        From this we conclude that $C=\mathbb{Z}_{+}$, so the theorem is true for all positive integers $n$.

        First we show the theorem is true for $n=1$.
        In this case $A$ consists of a single element $\{a\}$, and its only proper subset $B$ is the empty set.

        Now assume that the theorem is true for $n$; we prove it true for $n+1$.
        Suppose that $f: A \rightarrow\{1, \ldots, n+1\}$ is a bijection, and $B$ is a nonempty proper subset of $A$.
        Choose an element $a_{0}$ of $B$ and an element $a_{1}$ of $A-B$.
        We apply the **Lemma 6.1** to conclude there is a bijection

        $$
        g: A-\left\{a_{0}\right\} \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}
        $$

        Now $B-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$ is a proper subset of $A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$, for $a_{1}$ belongs to $A-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$ and not to $B-\left\{a_{0}\right\}$.
        Because the theorem has been assumed to hold for the integer $n$, we conclude the following:

        1. There exists no bijection $h: B-\left\{a_{0}\right\} \rightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}$.

        2. Either $B-\left\{a_{0}\right\}=\varnothing$, or there exists a bijection

        $$
        k: B-\left\{a_{0}\right\} \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, p\} \quad \text { for some } p<n \text {. }
        $$

        **Lemma 6.1**, combined with (1), implies that there is no bijection of $B$ with $\{1, \ldots, n+1\}$.
        This is the first half of what we wanted to proved.  
        To prove the second half, note that if $B-\left\{a_{0}\right\}=\varnothing$, there is a bijection of $B$ with the set $\{1\}$; while if $B-\left\{a_{0}\right\} \neq \varnothing$, we can apply **Lemma 6.1**, along with (2), to conclude that there is a bijection of $B$ with $\{1, \ldots, p+1\}$.
        In either case, there is a bijection of $B$ with $\{1, \ldots, m\}$ for some $m<n+1$, as desired.  
        The induction principle now shows that the theorem is true for all $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{+}$.

!!! theorem "Corollary 6.3"
    If $A$ is finite, there is no bijection of $A$ with a proper subset of itself.

    !!! proof
        Assume that $B$ is a proper subset of $A$ and that $f: A \rightarrow B$ is a bijection.
        By assumption, there is a bijection $g: A \rightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}$ for some $n$.
        The composite $g \circ f^{-1}$ is then a bijection of $B$ with $\{1, \ldots, n\}$.
        This contradicts **Theorem 6.2**.

!!! theorem "Corollary 6.4"
    $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ is not finite.

    !!! proof
        The function $f: \mathbb{Z}_{+} \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}_{+}-\{1\}$ defined by $f(n)=n+1$ is a bijection of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$with a proper subset of itself.
        If $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ is finite, it is a contradiction to **Corollary 6.3**, so $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ is not finite.

!!! theorem "Corollary 6.5"
    The cardinality of a finite set $A$ is uniquely determined by $A$.

    !!! proof
        Let $m<n$.
        Suppose there are bijections

        $$
        \begin{aligned}
        & f: A \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\} \\
        & g: A \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, m\}
        \end{aligned}
        $$

        Then the composite

        $$
        g \circ f^{-1}:\{1, \ldots, n\} \longrightarrow\{1, \ldots, m\}
        $$

        is a bijection of the finite set $\{1, \ldots, n\}$ with a proper subset of itself, contradicting **Corollary 6.3**.

!!! theorem "Corollary 6.6"
    If $B$ is a subset of the finite set $A$, then $B$ is finite.
    If $B$ is a proper subset of $A$, then the cardinality of $B$ is less than the cardinality of $A$.

!!! theorem "Corollary 6.7"
    Let $B$ be a nonempty set.
    Then the following are equivalent:

    1. $B$ is finite.

    2. There is a surjective function from a section of the positive integers onto $B$.

    3. There is an injective function from $B$ into a section of the positive integers.

    !!! proof
        (1) $\Longrightarrow$ (2).  
        Since $B$ is nonempty, there is, for some $n$, a bijective function $f:\{1, \ldots, n\} \rightarrow B$.

        (2) $\Longrightarrow$ (3).  
        If $f:\{1, \ldots, n\} \rightarrow B$ is surjective, define $g: B \rightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}$ by the equation

        $$
        g(b)=\text { smallest element of } f^{-1}(\{b\})
        $$

        Because $f$ is surjective, the set $f^{-1}\{(b)\}$ is nonempty; then the well-ordering property of $\mathbb{Z}_{+}$ tells us that $g(b)$ is uniquely defined.
        The map $g$ is injective, for if $b \neq b^{\prime}$, then the sets $f^{-1}(\{b\})$ and $f^{-1}\left(\left\{b^{\prime}\right\}\right)$ are disjoint, so their smallest elements must be different.

        (3) $\Longrightarrow$ (1).  
        If $g: B \rightarrow\{1, \ldots, n\}$ is injective, then changing the range of $g$ gives a bijection of $B$ with a subset of $\{1, \ldots, n\}$.
        It follows from the **Corollary 6.6** that $B$ is finite.

!!! theorem "Corollary 6.8"
    Finite unions and finite cartesian products of finite sets are finite.

    !!! proof
        We first show that if $A$ and $B$ are finite, so is $A \cup B$.
        The result is trivial if $A$ or $B$ is empty.
        Otherwise, there are bijections $f:\{1, \ldots, m\} \rightarrow A$ and $g$ : $\{1, \ldots, n\} \rightarrow B$ for some choice of $m$ and $n$.
        Define a function $h:\{1, \ldots, m+$ $n\} \rightarrow A \cup B$ by setting $h(i)=f(i)$ for $i=1,2, \ldots, m$ and $h(i)=g(i-m)$ for $i=m+1, \ldots, m+n$.
        It is easy to check that $h$ is surjective, and from **Corollary 6.7** it follows that $A \cup B$ is finite.

        Now we show by induction that finiteness of the sets $A_{1}, \ldots, A_{n}$ implies finiteness of their union.
        This result is trivial for $n=1$.
        Assuming it true for $n-1$, we note that $A_{1} \cup \cdots \cup A_{n}$ is the union of the two finite sets $A_{1} \cup \cdots \cup A_{n-1}$ and $A_{n}$, so the result of the preceding paragraph applies.

        Now we show that the cartesian product of two finite sets $A$ and $B$ is finite.
        Given $a \in A$, the set $\{a\} \times B$ is finite, being in bijective correspondence with $B$.
        The set $A \times B$ is the union of these sets; since there are only finitely many of them, $A \times B$ is a finite union of finite sets and thus finite.

        To prove that the product $A_{1} \times \cdots \times A_{n}$ is finite if each $A_{i}$ is finite, one proceeds by induction.