# § 3. Isomorphic Binary Structures

!!! definition "Definition 3.7.1 : Binary Algebraic Structure"
    A **binary algebraic structure** is a set $S$ with a binary operation $*$ on $S$, $\langle S, * \rangle$.

!!! definition "Definition 3.7 : Isomorphism / Homomorphism Property"
    Let $\langle S, ∗ \rangle$ and $\langle S', ∗' \rangle$ be binary algebraic structures.  
    An **isomorphism** of $S$ with $S'$ is a one-to-one function $\phi$ mapping $S$ onto $S'$ satisfying the homomorphism property.  
    **homomorphism property** : $\forall x, y \in S$, $\phi(x * y) = \phi(x) *' \phi(y)$  
    If such a map $\phi$ exists, then $S$ and $S^{\prime}$ are isomorphic binary structures, which we denote by $S \simeq S^{\prime}$, omitting the $*$ and $*^{\prime}$ from the notation.

!!! example "Example 3.8 : How to Show That Binary Structures are Isomorphic"
    1. Define the function $\phi$ that gives the isomorphism of $S$ with $S'$.
    2. Show that $\phi$ is one-to-one.
    3. Show that $\phi$ is onto $S'$.
    4. Show that $\forall x, y \in S$, $\phi(x * y) = \phi(x) *' \phi(y)$.

!!! example "Example 3.10 : How to Show That Binary Structures are Not Isomorphic"
    1. Show that there is no function $\phi$ that is one-to-one and onto.
    Check if cardinality of $|S|$ and $|S'|$ is different.
    2. Find any **structual property** of $|S|$ that doesn't hold in $|S'|$.  
    ex) The set has 4 elements, The operation is commutative, $x * x = x$ for all $x \in S$, The equation $a * x = b$ has a solution $x$ for all $a, b \in S$

!!! definition "Definition 3.12 : Identity Element"
    Let $\langle S, * \rangle$ be a binary algebraic structure.  
    $e \in S$ is an **identity element for** $*$ if $e*s=s*e=s$ for all $s \in S$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 3.13 : Uniqueness of Identity Element"
    $\langle S, * \rangle$ has at most one identity element.
    If there is an identity element, it is unique.

    !!! proof
        Let $e$ and $e'$ be identity elements.
        Since $e$ is an identity element, $e * e' = e'$.
        $e'$ is also an identity element, so $e * e' = e$.
        $e * e' = e = e'$, so identity element must be unique.

!!! theorem "Theorem 3.14 : Identity Element in Isomorphism"
    Suppose $\langle S, * \rangle$ has an identity element $e$ for $*$.  
    If $\phi : S \rightarrow S'$ is an isomorphism of $\langle S, * \rangle$ with $\langle S', *' \rangle$, then $\phi(e)$ is an identity element for $*'$ on $S'$.

    !!! proof
        $\forall \ s' \in S'$, since $\phi$ is an isomorphism, $\exists \ s \in S$ s.t. $\phi(s) = s'$.  
        $\phi(e*s)=\phi(s*e)=\phi(s)$  
        Since $\phi$ is an isomorphism it can be rewritten as $\phi(e) *' \phi(s)=\phi(s) *' \phi(e)=\phi(s)$  
        $\forall \ s' \in S'$, $\phi(e) *' s' = s' *' \phi(e) = s'$, so $\phi(e)$ is an identity element for $*'$ on $S'$.
