# ยง 4. Groups

## Definition and Examples

!!! definition "Definition 4.1 : Group"
    A **group** $\langle G, *\rangle$ is a set $G$, closed under a binary operation $*$, such that the following axioms are satisfied:

    1. $\mathscr{G}_{1}:$ For all $a, b, c \in G$, we have

        $$
        (a * b) * c=a *(b * c). \quad \textbf {associativity of } *
        $$

    2. $\mathscr{T}_{2}$ : There is an element $e$ in $G$ such that for all $x \in G$,

        $$
        e * x=x * e=x . \quad \textbf { identity element } e \text { for } *
        $$

    3. $\mathscr{G}_{3}$ : Corresponding to each $a \in G$, there is an element $a^{\prime}$ in $G$ such that

        $$
        a * a^{\prime}=a^{\prime} * a=e . \quad \textbf { inverse } a^{\prime} \text { of } a
        $$

!!! definition "Definition 4.3 : Abelian Group"
    A group $G$ is **abelian** if its binary operation is commutative.

!!! example "Example 4.13 : General Linear Group of Degree $n$"
    The subset $S$ of $M_{n}(\mathbb{R})$ consisting of all invertible $n \times n$ matrices under matrix multiplication is a group.

    !!! proof
        
        We start by showing that $S$ is closed under matrix multiplication.
        Let $A$ and $B$ be in $S$, so that both $A^{-1}$ and $B^{-1}$ exist and $A A^{-1}=B B^{-1}=I_{n}$.
        Then

        $$
        (A B)\left(B^{-1} A^{-1}\right)=A\left(B B^{-1}\right) A^{-1}=A I_{n} A^{-1}=I_{n},
        $$

        so that $A B$ is invertible and consequently is also in $S$.

        Since matrix multiplication is associative and $I_{n}$ acts as the identity element, and since each element of $S$ has an inverse by definition of $S$, we see that $S$ is indeed a group.
        This group is not commutative.
        It is our first example of a nonabelian group.

    The group of invertible $n \times n$ matrices described above is of fundamental importance in linear algebra.
    It is the **general linear group of degree** $n$, and is usually denoted by $G L(n, \mathbb{R})$.

    Those of you who have studied linear algebra know that a matrix $A$ in $G L(n, \mathbb{R})$ gives rise to an invertible linear transformation $T: \mathbb{R}^{n} \rightarrow$ $\mathbb{R}^{n}$, defined by $T(\mathbf{x})=A \mathbf{x}$, and that conversely, every invertible linear transformation of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ into itself is defined in this fashion by some matrix in $G L(n, \mathbb{R})$.
    Also, matrix multiplication corresponds to composition of linear transformations.
    Thus all invertible linear transformations of $\mathbb{R}^{n}$ into itself form a group under function composition; this group is usually denoted by $G L\left(\mathbb{R}^{n}\right)$.
    Of course, $G L(n, \mathbb{R}) \simeq G L\left(\mathbb{R}^{n}\right)$.

## Elementary Properties of Groups

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.15 : Left and Right Cancellation Laws"
    If $G$ is a group with binary operation $*$, then the **left and right cancellation laws** hold in $G$, that is, $a * b=a * c$ implies $b=c$, and $b * a=c * a$ implies $b=c$ for all $a, b, c \in G$.

    !!! proof
        Suppose $a * b=a * c$. Then by $\mathscr{G}_{3}$, there exists $a^{\prime}$, and

        $$
        a^{\prime} *(a * b)=a^{\prime} *(a * c)
        $$

        By the associative law,

        $$
        \left(a^{\prime} * a\right) * b=\left(a^{\prime} * a\right) * c
        $$

        By the definition of $a^{\prime}$ in $\mathscr{T}_{3}, a^{\prime} * a=e$, so

        $$
        e * b=e * c
        $$

        By the definition of $e$ in $\mathscr{G}_{2}$,

        $$
        b=c .
        $$

        Similarly, from $b * a=c * a$ one can deduce that $b=c$ upon multiplication on the right by $a^{\prime}$ and use of the axioms for a group.

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.16 : Uniqueness of Solution of Linear Equation"
    If $G$ is a group with binary operation $*$, and if $a$ and $b$ are any elements of $G$, then the linear equations $a * x=b$ and $y * a=b$ have unique solutions $x$ and $y$ in $G$.

    !!! proof
        First we show the existence of at least one solution by just computing that $a^{\prime} * b$ is a solution of $a * x=b$. Note that

        $$
        \begin{aligned}
        a *\left(a^{\prime} * b\right) & =\left(a * a^{\prime}\right) * b, & & \text { associative law, } \\
        & =e * b, & & \text { definition of } a^{\prime}, \\
        & =b, & & \text { property of } e .
        \end{aligned}
        $$

        Thus $x=a^{\prime} * b$ is a solution of $a * x=b$. In a similar fashion, $y=b * a^{\prime}$ is a solution of $y * a=b$.

        To show uniqueness of $y$, we use the standard method of assuming that we have two solutions, $y_{1}$ and $y_{2}$, so that $y_{1} * a=b$ and $y_{2} * a=b$.
        Then $y_{1} * a=y_{2} * a$, and by **Theorem 4.15**, $y_{1}=y_{2}$.
        The uniqueness of $x$ follows similarly.


!!! theorem "Theorem 4.17 : Uniqueness of Identity Element and Inverse of each Element"
    In a group $G$ with binary operation $*$, there is only one element $e$ in $G$ such that

    $$
    e * x=x * e=x
    $$

    for all $x \in G$.
    Likewise for each $a \in G$, there is only one element $a^{\prime}$ in $G$ such that

    $$
    a^{\prime} * a=a * a^{\prime}=e
    $$

    In summary, the identity element and inverse of each element are unique in a group.

    !!! proof
        **Theorem 3.13** shows that an identity element for any binary structure is unique.
        No use of the group axioms was required to show this.

        Turning to the uniqueness of an inverse, suppose that $a \in G$ has inverses $a^{\prime}$ and $a^{\prime \prime}$ so that $a^{\prime} * a=a * a^{\prime}=e$ and $a^{\prime \prime} * a=a * a^{\prime \prime}=e$.
        Then

        $$
        a * a^{\prime \prime}=a * a^{\prime}=e
        $$

        and, by **Theorem 4.15**,

        $$
        a^{\prime \prime}=a^{\prime},
        $$

        so the inverse of $a$ in a group is unique.

!!! theorem "Corollary 4.18"
    Let $G$ be a group.
    For all $a, b \in G$, we have $(a * b)^{\prime}=b^{\prime} * a^{\prime}$.

    !!! proof
        Note that in a group $G$, we have

        $$
        (a * b) *\left(b^{\prime} * a^{\prime}\right)=a *\left(b * b^{\prime}\right) * a^{\prime}=(a * e) * a^{\prime}=a * a^{\prime}=e .
        $$

        This equation and **Theorem 4.17** show that $b^{\prime} * a^{\prime}$ is the unique inverse of $a * b$.
        That is, $(a * b)^{\prime}=b^{\prime} * a^{\prime}$.

## Binary Algebraic Structures with Weaker Axioms

!!! definition "Definition 4.18.1 : Semigroup / Monoid"
    **Semigroup** is a set with an associative binary operation.
    
    **Monoid** is a semigroup that has an identity element.

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.18.2 : One Sided Definition of a Group"
    **One sided defined** group satisfies,  

    1. The binary operation $*$ on $G$ is associative.
    2. There exists a **left identity element** $e_L$ in $G$ such that $e_L * x=x$ for all $x \in G$.
    3. For each $a \in G$, there exists a **left inverse** $a_L^{\prime}$ in $G$ such that $a_L^{\prime} * a=e$.
    
    One sided defined group also satisfies group axioms.

    !!! proof
        $$
        \begin{gathered}    
        x*e_L=(e_L*x)*e_L=(((x_L')_L'*x_L')*x)*e_L=((x_L')_L'*(x_L'*x))*e_L \\
        =((x_L')_L'*e_L)*e_L=(x_L')_L'*(x_L'*x)=((x_L')_L'*x_L')*x=e_L*x=x \\
        \therefore e_L=e.
        \end{gathered}
        $$

        $$
        \begin{gathered}    
        a*a_L'=((a_L')_L'*a_L')*a*a_L'=(a_L')_L'*(a_L'*a)*a_L'=(a_L')_L'*a_L'=e_L \\
        \therefore a_L'=a'.
        \end{gathered}
        $$

## Finite Groups and Group Tables

!!! theorem "Theorem 4.18.3 : Property of Group Table"
    We should be able to list some necessary conditions that a table giving a binary operation on a finite set must satisfy for the operation to give a group structure on the set.

    1. There must be an element $e$ that acts as an identity element.
        We will put this element $e$ at the first column and row.
    
    2. The first colum and row of the table must contain itself.
        ($a*e=e*a=a$)
    3. Each element $a$ of the group must appear once and only once in each row and each column of the table.
        (**Theorem 4.16**)
    
    ---

    There is only one group of one or two or three elements, up to isomorphism.
    
    $$
    \begin{array}{c|c}
    * & e \\
    \hline
    e & e \\
    \end{array}
    \qquad
    \begin{array}{c|c|c}
    * & e & a \\
    \hline
    e & e & a \\
    \hline
    a & a & e \\
    \end{array}
    \qquad
    \begin{array}{c|c|c|c}
    * & e & a & b \\
    \hline
    e & e & a & b \\
    \hline
    a & a & b & e \\
    \hline
    b & b & e & a
    \end{array}
    $$
