# ยง 6. Cyclic Groups

## Elementary Properties of Cyclic Groups

!!! note "Theorem 6.1 : Cyclic Group is Abelian"
    Every cyclic group is abelian.

    !!! abstract "Proof"
        Let $G$ be a cyclic group generated by $a$.  
        $G=\langle a \rangle = \{ a^n \ | \ n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$  
        $\forall g_1, g_2 \in G$, $\exists \ r_1, r_2 \in \mathbb{Z}$ s.t. $g_1 = a^{r_1}, g_2 = a^{r_2}$.  
        $g_1g_2=a^{r_1}a^{r_2}=a^{r_1+r_2}=a^{r_2+r_1}=a^{r_2}a^{r_1}=g_2g_1$, so $G$ is abelian.

!!! note "Theorem 6.3 : Division Algorithm for $\mathbb{Z}$"
    $n, m \in \mathbb{Z}, m>0$, $\exists ! \  q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ s.t. $n=mq+r$, $0 \le r < m$.

!!! note "Theorem 6.6 : Subgroup of Cyclic Group is Cyclic"
    A subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic.

    !!! abstract "Proof"
        Let $G=\langle a \rangle$, $H \le G$.  
        If $H=\{e\}$, $H=\langle e \rangle$ is cyclic.  
        If $H \ne \{e\}$, $a^n \in H$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}^+$.
        Let $m$ be the smallest integer in $\mathbb{Z}^+$ such that $a^m \in H$.
        Let's show that $H = \langle a^m \rangle$.  
        $\forall \ a^n \in H$, by Division Algorithm (**Theorem 6.3**)         $\exists ! \  q, r \in \mathbb{Z}$ s.t. $n=mq+r$, $0 \le r < m$.  
        $a^n=a^{mq+r}=(a^m)^q a^r$, $a^r=a^n (a^m)^{-q}$.  
        Since $a^n, a^m \in H$, $a^r \in H$.  
        But $m$ was the smallest positive integer s.t. $a^m \in H$, so $r=0$.  
        $n=qm$, $a^n=(a^m)^q$ $\ \therefore H = \langle a^m \rangle$.

!!! note "Corollary 6.7 : Subgroups of $\mathbb{Z}$ Under Addition is $n\mathbb{Z}$" 
    Subgroups of $\mathbb{Z}$ under addition is $n\mathbb{Z}$ under addition for $n \in \mathbb{Z}$.

!!! info "Definition 6.8 : Greatest Common Divisor"
    $r, s \in \mathbb{Z}^+$, $H=\{ nr+ms \ | \ n, m \in \mathbb{Z}\}$  
    $H$ is a subgroup of $\mathbb{Z}$.
    The positive generator $d$ of the cyclic group $H$ under addition is the **greatest common divisor (gcd)** of $r$, $s$.

!!! info "Definition 6.8.1 : Relatively Prime"
    Two positive integers are **relatively prime** if their gcd is $1$.

## The Structure of Cyclic Groups

!!! note "Theorem 6.10 : The Structure of Cyclic Groups"
    Let $G=\langle a \rangle$ be a cyclic group with generator $a$.  
    If the order of $G$ is infinite, then $G$ is isomorphic to $\langle \mathbb{Z}, + \rangle$.  
    If $G$ has finite order $n$, then $G$ is isomorphic to $\langle \mathbb{Z}_n, +_n \rangle$.

    !!! abstract "Proof"
        1. Order of $G$ is infinite.  
        $\forall \ h, k \in \mathbb{Z}^+$, $a^h \ne e$, $a^h \ne a^k$.  
        If $a^h = a^k$, $h>k$, $a^h a^{-k} = a^{h-k} = e$, Contradiction.  
        Let $\phi : G \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}$, $\phi(a^i)=i$.
        $\phi$ is one-to-one and onto $\mathbb{Z}$.
        $\phi(a^ia^j)=\phi(a^{i+j})=i+j=\phi(a^i)+\phi(a^j)$, so homomorphism property holds, and $\phi$ is an isomorphism.  
        2. $G$ has finite order $n$.  
        $\forall \ h, k \in \mathbb{Z}_n$, $a^n = e$, $a^h \ne a^k$.
        Also, $a^0=e, a^1, a^2, \cdots, a^{n-1}$ are distinct.
        Proof is similar to Case 1.  
        Let $\psi : G \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}_n$, $\psi(a^i)=i$.
        $\psi$ is one-to-one and onto $\mathbb{Z}_n$.  
        Note that $a^n=e$, so $a^ia^j=a^k$, $i +_n j = k$.
        $\psi(a^ia^j)=\psi(a^{i+j})=i+_n j=\psi(a^i)+_n \psi(a^j)$, so homomorphism property holds, and $\psi$ is an isomorphism.  

## Subgroups of Finite Cyclic Groups

!!! note "Theorem 6.14 : Subgroups of Finite Cyclic Groups"
    Let $G=\langle a \rangle$, $|G|=n$, $b=a^s \in G$.  
    $|H|=|\langle b \rangle|=|\langle a^s \rangle|=\frac{n}{\gcd(n, s)}$  
    $\langle a^s \rangle=\langle a^t \rangle$ iff $\gcd(s, n)=\gcd(t, n)$

    !!! abstract "Proof"
        $\langle a^s \rangle$ is a cyclic subgroup $H$ of $G$ by **Theorem 5.17**.
        Let's show that $H$ contains $\frac{n}{\gcd(n, s)}$ elements.
        $H$ has as many elements as the smallest positive power $m$ of $a^s$ that gives the identity.
        Smallest positive integer satisfying $(a^{s})^m=e$ satisfies $n \ | \ sm$, so $m=\frac{n}{\gcd(n, s)}$.  
        By **Theorem 6.10** we can think $G$ as $\mathbb{Z}_n$, and if $d \ | \ n$, then cyclic subgroup $\langle d \rangle$ has $\frac{n}{d}$ elements, and $\langle d \rangle$ contains all the positive integers $m$ less than $n$ such that $\gcd(m, n) = d$.  
        $\therefore$ There is only one subgroup of $\mathbb{Z}_n$ of order $\frac{n}{d}$, $\langle d \rangle$.  
        $\therefore$ $\langle a^s \rangle=\langle a^t \rangle$ iff $\gcd(s, n)=\gcd(t, n)$.

!!! note "Corollary 6.16"
    If $a$ is a generator of a finite cyclic group $G$ of order $n$, then the other generators of $G$ are the elements of the form $a^r$, where $r$ is relatively prime to $n$.