# § 5. Linear Dependence and Linear Independence

## Linear Dependence and Linear Independence

!!! definition "Definition 5.1 : Linearly Dependent"
    A subset $S$ of a vector space $V$ is called **linearly dependent** if there exist a **finite** number of distinct vectors $u_{1}, u_{2}, \ldots, u_{n}$ in $S$ and scalars $a_{1}, a_{2}, \ldots, a_{n}$, not all zero, such that

    $$
    a_{1} u_{1}+a_{2} u_{2}+\cdots+a_{n} u_{n}=0
    $$

    In this case we also say that the vectors of $S$ are **linearly dependent**.

    For any vectors $u_{1}, u_{2}, \ldots, u_{n}$, we have $a_{1} u_{1}+a_{2} u_{2}+\cdots+a_{n} u_{n}=0$ if $a_{1}=a_{2}=\cdots=a_{n}=0$.
    We call this the **trivial representation** of $0$ as a linear combination of $u_{1}, u_{2}, \ldots, u_{n}$.
    Thus, for a set to be linearly dependent, there must exist a nontrivial representation of $0$ as a linear combination of vectors in the set.

!!! definition "Definition 5.2 : Linearly Independent"
    A subset $S$ of a vector space that is not linearly dependent is called **linearly independent**.
    As before, we also say that the vectors of $S$ are **linearly independent**.

!!! concept "Concept 5.3 : Basic facts about linear dependence / independence"
    
    1. The empty set is linearly independent, for linearly dependent sets must be nonempty.

    2. A set consisting of a single nonzero vector is linearly independent.
    For if $\{u\}$ is linearly dependent, then $a u=0$ for some nonzero scalar $a$.
    Thus $u=a^{-1}(a u)=a^{-1} 0=0$.

    3. Any subset of a vector space that contains the zero vector is linearly dependent, because $0=1 \cdot 0$ is a nontrivial representation of $0$ as a linear combination of vectors in the set.
    
    4. A set is linearly independent if and only if the only representations of $0$ as linear combinations of its vectors are trivial representations.

    The condition in item 4 provides a useful method for determining whether a finite set is linearly independent.

!!! example "Example 5.4 : Showing that a set is linearly dependent"
    Consider the set

    $$
    S=\{(1,3,-4,2),(2,2,-4,0),(1,-3,2,-4),(-1,0,1,0)\}
    $$

    in $\mathbb{R}^{4}$.
    We show that $S$ is linearly dependent and then express one of the vectors in $S$ as a linear combination of the other vectors in $S$.
    To show that
    $S$ is linearly dependent, we must find scalars $a_{1}, a_{2}, a_{3}$, and $a_{4}$, not all zero, such that

    $$
    a_{1}(1,3,-4,2)+a_{2}(2,2,-4,0)+a_{3}(1,-3,2,-4)+a_{4}(-1,0,1,0)=0 .
    $$

    Finding such scalars amounts to finding a nonzero solution to the system of linear equations
    
    $$
    \begin{alignedat}{5}
    a_{1}  &+2a_{2} &+ a_{3}  &- a_{4} &= 0,\\
    3a_{1} &+2a_{2} &-3a_{3}  &\phantom{{}-a_{4}} &= 0,\\
    -4a_{1}&-4a_{2} &+2a_{3}  &+ a_{4} &= 0,\\
    2a_{1} &\phantom{{}+2a_{2}} &-4a_{3} &\phantom{{}-a_{4}} &= 0.
    \end{alignedat}
    $$

    One such solution is $a_{1}=4, a_{2}=-3, a_{3}=2$, and $a_{4}=0$. Thus $S$ is a linearly dependent subset of $\mathbb{R}^{4}$, and
    
    $$
    4(1,3,-4,2)-3(2,2,-4,0)+2(1,-3,2,-4)+0(-1,0,1,0)=0
    $$

!!! example "Example 5.5 : Showing that a set is linearly independent"
    To prove that the set

    $$
    S=\{(1,0,0,-1),(0,1,0,-1),(0,0,1,-1),(0,0,0,1)\}
    $$

    is linearly independent, we must show that the only linear combination of vectors in $S$ that equals the zero vector is the one in which all the coefficients are zero.
    Suppose that $a_{1}, a_{2}, a_{3}$, and $a_{4}$ are scalars such that

    $$
    a_{1}(1,0,0,-1)+a_{2}(0,1,0,-1)+a_{3}(0,0,1,-1)+a_{4}(0,0,0,1)=(0,0,0,0)
    $$

    Equating the corresponding coordinates of the vectors on the left and the right sides of this equation, we obtain the following system of linear equations.

    $$
    \begin{alignedat}{5}
    a_{1} &\phantom{{}-a_{2}} &\phantom{{}-a_{3}} &\phantom{{}+a_{4}} &= 0,\\
    \phantom{{}-a_{1}} & \phantom{++} a_{2} &\phantom{{}-a_{3}} &\phantom{{}+a_{4}} &= 0,\\
    \phantom{{}-a_{1}} &\phantom{{}-a_{2}} & a_{3} &\phantom{{}+a_{4}} &= 0,\\
    -a_{1} &-a_{2} &-a_{3} &+a_{4} &= 0.
    \end{alignedat}
    $$

    Clearly the only solution to this system is $a_{1}=a_{2}=a_{3}=a_{4}=0$, and so $S$ is linearly independent.

## Minimal Generating Sets and Linear Independence

Suppose that $V$ is a vector space over an infinite field and that $W$ is a subspace of $V$. Unless $W$ is the zero subspace, $W$ is an infinite set.
It is desirable to find a "small" finite subset $S$ that generates $W$ because we can then describe each vector in $W$ as a linear combination of the finite number of vectors in $S$.

!!! concept "Concept 5.6 : Minimal generating sets are linearly independent."
    Suppose that $S$ is any linearly dependent set containing two or more vectors.
    Then some vector $v \in S$ can be written as a linear combination of the other vectors in $S$, and the subset obtained by removing $v$ from $S$ has the same span as $S$.
    It follows that if no proper subset of $S$ generates the span of $S$, then $S$ must be linearly independent.

Another way to view **Concept 5.6** is given in **Theorem 5.9**.

!!! theorem "Theorem 5.7 : Superset of a linearly dependent set is linearly dependent."
    Let $V$ be a vector space, and let $S_{1} \subseteq S_{2} \subseteq V$.
    If $S_{1}$ is linearly dependent, then $S_{2}$ is linearly dependent.

    !!! proof
        Since $S_1$ is linearly dependent, there must exist a nontrivial representation of $0$ as a linear combination of vectors in $S_1$.
        Since $S_1 \subseteq S_2$, the same set of vectors are a nontrivial representation of $0$ as a linear combination of vectors in $S_2$.
        Therefore, $S_2$ is linearly dependent.

!!! corollary "Corollary 5.8"
    Let $V$ be a vector space, and let $S_{1} \subseteq S_{2} \subseteq V$.
    If $S_{2}$ is linearly independent, then $S_{1}$ is linearly independent.

    !!! proof
        If $S_1$ is linearly dependent, by **Theorem 5.7**, $S_2$ is linearly dependent, which immediately leads to a contradiction.
        Therefore, $S_1$ is linearly independent.

!!! theorem "Theorem 5.9 : Adding a vector creates dependence iff it lies in the span."
    Let $S$ be a linearly independent subset of a vector space $V$, and let $v$ be a vector in $V$ that is not in $S$.
    Then $S \cup\{v\}$ is linearly dependent if and only if $v \in \operatorname{span}(S)$.

    !!! proof
        If $S \cup\{v\}$ is linearly dependent, then there are vectors $u_{1}, u_{2}, \ldots, u_{n}$ in $S \cup\{v\}$ such that $a_{1} u_{1}+a_{2} u_{2}+\cdots+a_{n} u_{n}=0$ for some nonzero scalars $a_{1}, a_{2}, \ldots, a_{n}$.
        Because $S$ is linearly independent, one of the $u_{i}$ 's, say $u_{1}$, equals $v$.
        Thus $a_{1} v+a_{2} u_{2}+\cdots+a_{n} u_{n}=0$, and so
        
        $$
        v=a_{1}^{-1}\left(-a_{2} u_{2}-\cdots-a_{n} u_{n}\right)=-\left(a_{1}^{-1} a_{2}\right) u_{2}-\cdots-\left(a_{1}^{-1} a_{n}\right) u_{n}
        $$

        Since $v$ is a linear combination of $u_{2}, \ldots, u_{n}$, which are in $S$, we have $v \in$ $\operatorname{span}(S)$.

        Conversely, let $v \in \operatorname{span}(S)$. Then there exist vectors $v_{1}, v_{2}, \ldots, v_{m}$ in $S$ and scalars $b_{1}, b_{2}, \ldots, b_{m}$ such that $v=b_{1} v_{1}+b_{2} v_{2}+\cdots+b_{m} v_{m}$. Hence
        
        $$
        0=b_{1} v_{1}+b_{2} v_{2}+\cdots+b_{m} v_{m}+(-1) v
        $$

        Since $v \neq v_{i}$ for $i=1,2, \ldots, m$, the coefficient of $v$ in this linear combination is nonzero, and so the set $\left\{v_{1}, v_{2}, \ldots, v_{m}, v\right\}$ is linearly dependent.
        Therefore $S \cup\{v\}$ is linearly dependent by **Theorem 5.7**.

## Exercise

!!! exercise "Exercise 5.9"
    Let $u$ and $v$ be distinct vectors in a vector space $V$.
    Show that $\{u, v\}$ is linearly dependent if and only if $u$ or $v$ is a multiple of the other.

!!! exercise "Exercise 5.16"
    Prove that a set $S$ of vectors is linearly independent if and only if each finite subset of $S$ is linearly independent.
