# § 7. Maximal Linearly Independent Subsets

Our principal goal in this section is to prove that every vector space has a basis.
This result is important in the study of infinite-dimensional vector spaces because it is often difficult to construct an explicit basis for such a space. Consider, for example, the vector space of real numbers over the field of rational numbers. There is no obvious way to construct a basis for this space, and yet it follows from the results of this section that such a basis does exist.

The difficulty that arises in extending the theorems of the preceding section to infinite-dimensional vector spaces is that the principle of mathematical induction, which played a crucial role in many of the proofs of Section 6, is no longer adequate.
Instead, a more general result called the **maximal principle** is needed.

## Maximal Principle

!!! definition "Definition 7.1 : Maximal Set"
    Let $\mathcal{F}$ be a family of sets.
    A member $M$ of $\mathcal{F}$ is called **maximal (with respect to set inclusion)** if $M$ is contained in no member of $\mathcal{F}$ other than $M$ itself.

!!! example "Example 7.2"
    Let $\mathcal{F}$ be the family of all subsets of a nonempty set $S$. (This family $\mathcal{F}$ is called the **power set** of $S$.)
    The set $S$ is easily seen to be a maximal element of $\mathcal{F}$.

!!! example "Example 7.3"
    Let $\mathcal{F}$ be the family of all finite subsets of an infinite set $S$.
    Then $\mathcal{F}$ has no maximal element.
    For if $M$ is any member of $\mathcal{F}$ and $s$ is any element of $S$ that is not in $M$, then $M \cup\{s\}$ is a member of $\mathcal{F}$ that contains $M$ as a proper subset.

!!! definition "Definition 7.4 : Chain of Sets"
    A collection of sets $\mathcal{C}$ is called a **chain** (or **nest** or **tower**) if for each pair of sets $A$ and $B$ in $\mathcal{C}$, either $A \subseteq B$ or $B \subseteq A$.

!!! definition "Definition 7.5 : Maximal Principle"
    Let $\mathcal{F}$ be a family of sets.
    If, for each chain $\mathcal{C} \subseteq \mathcal{F}$, there exists a member of $\mathcal{F}$ that contains each member of $\mathcal{C}$, then $\mathcal{F}$ contains a maximal member.

## Basis and Maximal Linearly Independent Subset

!!! definition "Definition 7.6 : Maximal Linearly Independent Subset"
    Let $S$ be a subset of a vector space $V$.
    A maximal linearly independent subset of $S$ is a subset $B$ of $S$ satisfying both of the following conditions.
    
    - (a) $B$ is linearly independent.
    - (b) The only linearly independent subset of $S$ that contains $B$ is $B$ itself.

!!! theorem "Theorem 7.7 : Basis is a maximal linearly independent subset."
    A basis $\beta$ for a vector space V is a maximal linearly independent subset of $V$.

    !!! proof
        1. $\beta$ is linearly independent by definition.
        2. If $v \in V$ and $v \notin \beta$, then $\beta \cup\{v\}$ is linearly dependent by **Theorem 5.9** because $\operatorname{span}(\beta)=V$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 7.8 : Maximal linearly independent subset is a basis."
    Let $V$ be a vector space and $S$ a subset that generates $V$.
    If $\beta$ is a maximal linearly independent subset of $S$, then $\beta$ is a basis for $V$.

    !!! proof
        Let $\beta$ be a maximal linearly independent subset of $S$.
        Because $\beta$ is linearly independent, it suffices to prove that $\beta$ generates $V$.
        We claim that $S \subseteq \operatorname{span}(\beta)$, for otherwise there exists a $v \in S$ such that $v \notin \operatorname{span}(\beta)$.
        Since **Theorem 5.9** implies that $\beta \cup\{v\}$ is linearly independent, we have contradicted the maximality of $\beta$.
        Therefore $S \subseteq \operatorname{span}(\beta)$.
        Because $\operatorname{span}(S)=V$, it follows from **Theorem 4.3** that $\operatorname{span}(\beta)=V$.

By **Theorem 7.7** and **Theorem 7.8**, a subset of a vector space is a basis if and only if it is a maximal linearly independent subset of the vector space.
Therefore we can accomplish our goal of proving that every vector space has a basis by showing that every vector space contains a maximal linearly independent subset. 

!!! theorem "Theorem 7.9 : Every vector space has a maximal linearly independent subset."
    Let $S$ be a linearly independent subset of a vector space $V$.
    There exists a maximal linearly independent subset of $V$ that contains $S$.

    !!! proof
        Let $\mathcal{F}$ denote the family of all linearly independent subsets of V that contain $S$.
        In order to show that $\mathcal{F}$ contains a maximal element, we must show that if $\mathcal{C}$ is a chain in $\mathcal{F}$, then there exists a member $U$ of $\mathcal{F}$ that contains each member of $\mathcal{C}$.
        We claim that $U$, the union of the members of $\mathcal{C}$, is the desired set.
        Clearly $U$ contains each member of $\mathcal{C}$, and so it suffices to prove that $U \in \mathcal{F}$ (i.e., that $U$ is a linearly independent subset of $V$ that contains $S$).
        Because each member of $\mathcal{C}$ is a subset of V containing $S$, we have $S \subseteq U \subseteq V$.
        Thus we need only prove that $U$ is linearly independent.
        Let $u_{1}, u_{2}, \ldots, u_{n}$ be in $U$ and $a_{1}, a_{2}, \ldots, a_{n}$ be scalars such that $a_{1} u_{1}+a_{2} u_{2}+\cdots+a_{n} u_{n}=0$. 
        Because $u_{i} \in U$ for $i=1,2, \ldots, n$, there exists a set $A_{i}$ in $\mathcal{C}$ such that $u_{i} \in A_{i}$.
        But since $\mathcal{C}$ is a chain, one of these sets, say $A_{k}$, contains all the others.
        Thus $u_{i} \in A_{k}$ for $i=1,2, \ldots, n$.
        However, $A_{k}$ is a linearly indcpendent set; so $a_{1} u_{1}+a_{2} u_{2}+\cdots+a_{n} u_{n}=0$ implies that $a_{1}=a_{2}=\cdots=a_{n}=0$.
        It follows that $U$ is linearly independent.
        
        The maximal principle implies that $\mathcal{F}$ has a maximal element. This element is easily seen to be a maximal linearly independent subset of $V$ that contains $S$.

!!! corollary "Corollary 7.10 : Every vector space has a basis."
    Every vector space has a basis.

It can be shown, analogously to **Corollary 6.6**, that every basis for an infinite-dimensional vector space has the same cardinality. (Sets have the same cardinality if there is a one-to-one and onto mapping between them.)

## Exercise

!!! exercise "Exercise 7.3"
    Let $V$ be the set of real numbers regarded as a vector space over the field of rational numbers.
    Prove that $V$ is infinite-dimensional.
    Hint: Use the fact that $\pi$ is transcendental, that is, $\pi$ is not a zero of any polynomial with rational coefficients.

!!! exercise "Exercise 7.4"
    Let $W$ be a subspace of a (not necessarily finite-dimensional) vector space $V$.
    Prove that any basis for $W$ is a subset of a basis for $V$. 

!!! exercise "Exercise 7.5"
    Prove the following infinite-dimensional version of **Theorem 6.2**: Let $\beta$ be a subset of an infinite-dimensional vector space $V$.
    Then $\beta$ is a basis for $V$ if and only if for each nonzero vector $v$ in $V$, there exist unique vectors $u_{1}, u_{2}, \ldots, u_{n}$ in $\beta$ and unique nonzero scalars $c_{1}, c_{2}, \ldots, c_{n}$ such that $v=c_{1} u_{1}+c_{2} u_{2}+\cdots+c_{n} u_{n}$.

!!! exercise "Exercise 7.6"
    Prove the following generalization of **Theorem 6.3**: Let $S_{1}$ and $S_{2}$ be subsets of a vector space V such that $S_{1} \subseteq S_{2}$.
    If $S_{1}$ is linearly independent and $S_{2}$ generates $V$, then there exists a basis $\beta$ for $V$ such that $S_{1} \subseteq \beta \subseteq S_{2}$. 
    Hint: Apply the maximal principle to the family of all linearly independent subsets of $S_{2}$ that contain $S_{1}$, and proceed as in the proof of **Theorem 7.9**.

!!! exercise "Exercise 7.7"
    Prove the following generalization of the replacement theorem (**Theorem 6.5**).
    Let $\beta$ be a basis for a vector space $V$, and let $S$ be a linearly independent subset of $V$.
    There exists a subset $S_{1}$ of $\beta$ such that $S \cup S_{1}$ is a basis for $V$.
