# ยง 3. Isomorphic Binary Structures

!!! definition "Definition 3.6.1 : Binary Algebraic Structure"
    A **binary algebraic structure** $\langle S, *\rangle$ is a set $S$ together with a binary operation $*$ on $S$.

!!! definition "Definition 3.7 : Isomorphism / Homomorphism Property / Isomorphic Binary Structure"
    Let $\langle S, *\rangle$ and $\left\langle S^{\prime}, *^{\prime}\right\rangle$ be binary algebraic structures.
    An **isomorphism** of $S$ with $S^{\prime}$ is a one-to-one function $\phi$ mapping $S$ onto $S^{\prime}$ such that

    $$
    \begin{gathered}
    \phi(x * y)=\phi(x) *^{\prime} \phi(y) \text { for all } x, y \in S. \\
    \textbf{homomorphism property}
    \end{gathered}
    $$

    If such a map $\phi$ exists, then $S$ and $S^{\prime}$ are **isomorphic binary structures**, which we denote by $S \simeq S^{\prime}$, omitting the $*$ and $*^{\prime}$ from the notation.

## How to Show That Binary Structures Are Isomorphic

!!! concept "Concept 3.7.1 : How to Show That Binary Structures Are Isomorphic"
    We now give an outline showing how to proceed from **Definition 3.7** to show that two binary structures $\langle S, *\rangle$ and $\left\langle S^{\prime}, *^{\prime}\right\rangle$ are isomorphic.
    
    1. Define the function $\phi$ that gives the isomorphism of $S$ with $S^{\prime}$.  
        Now this means that we have to describe, in some fashion, what $\phi(s)$ is to be for every $s \in S$.

    2. Show that $\phi$ is a one-to-one function.  
        That is, suppose that $\phi(x)=\phi(y)$ in $S^{\prime}$ and deduce from this that $x=y$ in $S$.

    3. Show that $\phi$ is onto $S^{\prime}$.  
        That is, suppose that $s^{\prime} \in S^{\prime}$ is given and show that there does exist $s \in S$ such that $\phi(s)=s^{\prime}$.

    4. Show that $\phi(x * y)=\phi(x) *^{\prime} \phi(y)$ for all $x, y \in S$.  
        This is just a question of computation.
    Compute both sides of the equation and see whether they are the same.

## How to Show That Binary Structures Are Not Isomorphic

!!! concept "Concept 3.9.1 : How to Show That Binary Structures Are Not Isomorphic"
    We have to show that there is no one-to-one function $\phi$ from $S$ onto $S^{\prime}$ with the property $\phi(x * y)=\phi(x) *^{\prime} \phi(y)$ for all $x, y \in S$.

    1. Show that there is no function $\phi$ that is one-to-one and onto.  
        Check if cardinality of $|S|$ and $|S'|$ is different.

    2. Find any **structual property** of $S$ that doesn't hold in $S'$.  
        A structural property of a binary structure is one that must be shared by any isomorphic structure.
        It is not concerned with names or some other nonstructural characteristics of the elements.

!!! example "Example 3.11.1 : Example of Structural Properties"
    - Possible Structural Properties

        1. The set has 4 elements.
        2. The operation is commutative.
        3. $x * x=x$ for all $x \in S$.
        4. The equation $a * x=b$ has a solution $x$ in $S$ for all $a, b \in S$.

    - Possible Nonstructural Properties

        1. The number 4 is an element.
        2. The operation is called "addition."
        3. The elements of $S$ are matrices.
        4. $S$ is a subset of $\mathbb{C}$.

---

!!! definition "Definition 3.12 : Identity Element"
    Let $\langle S, *\rangle$ be a binary structure.
    An element $e$ of $S$ is an **identity element** for $*$ if $e * s=s * e=s$ for all $s \in S$.

!!! theorem "Theorem 3.13 : Uniqueness of Identity Element"
    A binary structure $\langle S, *\rangle$ has at most one identity element.
    That is, if there is an identity element, it is unique.

    !!! proof
        Proceeding in the standard way to show uniqueness, suppose that both $e$ and $\bar{e}$ are elements of $S$ serving as identity elements.
        We let them compete with each other.
        Regarding $e$ as an identity element, we must have $e * \bar{e}=\bar{e}$.
        However, regarding $\bar{e}$ as an identity element, we must have $e * \bar{e}=e$.
        We thus obtain $e=\bar{e}$, showing that an identity element must be unique.

!!! theorem "Theorem 3.14 : Identity Element in Isomorphism"
    Suppose $\langle S, *\rangle$ has an identity element $e$ for $*$.
    If $\phi: S \rightarrow S^{\prime}$ is an isomorphism of $\langle S, *\rangle$ with $\left\langle S^{\prime}, *^{\prime}\right\rangle$, then $\phi(e)$ is an identity element for the binary operation $*^{\prime}$ on $S^{\prime}$.

    !!! proof
        Let $s^{\prime} \in S^{\prime}$.
        We must show that $\phi(e) *^{\prime} s^{\prime}=s^{\prime} *^{\prime} \phi(e)=s^{\prime}$.
        Because $\phi$ is an isomorphism, it is a one-to-one map of $S$ onto $S^{\prime}$.
        In particular, there exists $s \in S$ such that $\phi(s)=s^{\prime}$.
        Now $e$ is an identity element for $*$ so that we know that $e * s=s * e=s$.
        Because $\phi$ is a function, we then obtain

        $$
        \phi(e * s)=\phi(s * e)=\phi(s) .
        $$

        Using **Definition 3.7** of an isomorphism, we can rewrite this as

        $$
        \phi(e) *^{\prime} \phi(s)=\phi(s) *^{\prime} \phi(e)=\phi(s) \text {. }
        $$

        Remembering that we chose $s \in S$ such that $\phi(s)=s^{\prime}$, we obtain the desired relation $\phi(e) *^{\prime} s^{\prime}=s^{\prime} *^{\prime} \phi(e)=s^{\prime}$.
